# Lecture 2

## Parsing

### Grammar

1. Tokens (output of lexical analysis) - Vt
2. The nonterminals: Set of variables that denote sets of substrings that occur in the language - Vn
3. S is a distinguished nonterminal (S is an element of Vn) denoting the entire set of strings in L(G)

### Scanning vs. Parsing

- Regex is used to classify:
  - identifiers, numbers, keywords
  - REs are more concise and simpler for tokens than a grammar
- Regex exp. won't cut for any kinds of brackets in your language!
  - context-free grammars are used to count brakcets and expressions

### Derivations

- At each step, we choose a nonterminal to replace
- Leftmost derivation (deriving from left to right (left most))
- Rightmost derivation (deriving from right to left (right most nonterminal))

- expr ==> expr op expr

### Precedence

- In the grammar, we can define definitions that group operations (+, - and *, / mapping to different non-terminals)

- Doesn't generate the same tree as without precedence!

### Ambiguity

- If a grammar has more than one derivation for a single sentenial form, then it is ambiguous

- Regex is not powerful enough to say what we want to say, but grammar is!
  - Use grammar to generate superset of programs and filter out bad ones

### Parsing: The Big Picture

- Grammar, code -> Parser generator -> tokens, -> Parser -> IR

### Top-Down vs Bottom-Up

1. **Top-down parsers**

- Start at the root of the derivation tree and fill in
- picks a prod. and tries to match the input
- may require backtracking
- some grammars are backtrack-free

2. **Bottom-up parsers**

- Start at the leaves of the tree and fill in
- Start in a state valid for legal first tokens
- as input is consumed, change state to encode possibilities (recognize valid prefixes)
- use a stack to store both state and sentenial forms

### Top-down parsing

Start with the root of the parse tree, labelled with the start or goal symbol of the grammar. To build a parse, it repeats steps until the leaves match the input string

### LL(1)

How much lookahead is needed??

LL(1) means left to right scan, left-most derivation, and 1-token lookahead

### Predictive Parsing

Basic Idea:

- For any two productions A -> a | beta, we would like a distinct way of choosing the correct prod. to expand

- Key property:
  - Whenever two prods. A -> alpha AND A -> beta both appear in the grammar, we would like

    	     FIRST(alpha) AND FIRST(beta) = null

### Left factoring

What if a grammar doesn't have this property?

Sometimes, we can transform a grammar to have this property

For each non-terminal A find the longest prefix alpha common to 2 or more of its alternatives.

if alpha != empty string, replace all of the A prods, A -> alphaBeta1 | alphaBeta2 | ...

With A -> aA', A' -> B1 | B2 | ...

where A' is non-terminal. Repeat until no two alternatives for a single non-terminal have a common prefix
